Three methods to ensure accurate model registration were developed throughout the course of this work. Each of these methods used two sets of fiducial landmark points as input, one set on the patient’s spine model, and the other on the ideal spine model. These landmarks were manually placed on the transverse processes of each model used. Registration for each method was performed in SlicerIGT’s Fiducial Registration Wizard, in accordance with the nature of this input data. In particular, warping registration, as opposed to rigid registration, was performed on the point sets. The three methods are described in turn below.
2.1 Manually placed landmarks
As an initial, simplistic approach, only the manually placed landmark points common to the ideal model and the patient’s model were used for registration. These points formed what can be described as a warped sheet; the main distribution of the points was in along the spine in the superior-inferior direction, and right-left across each vertebra. This method included little information about the geometry of the spine in the anterior-posterior direction, and about possible length scale differences between the patient’s and the ideal models.
2.2 Constant anterior offset
The method using only the manually placed landmarks was improved upon by providing the registration module with more volumetric information from the model. Volumetric information was included in the point sets by duplicating each point in each of the warped sheets at a constant offset in the anterior direction in the scene view coordinate system. 
Adding these anterior-offset points also allowed differences in the model length scales (typically resulting from differences in age and development) to be accounted for. Length scales were taken into account by scaling the anterior offset magnitude. A distance of 30mm was chosen as the distance to duplicate points at on the ideal model. This distance was multiplied by the ratio of the patient’s spine model length to that of the ideal model, and the patient’s landmark points were duplicated at this scaled offset.
The length of each spine model was calculated as the sum of the magnitude of the vector between landmarks on subsequent vertebrae. This was computed for the left and right side landmarks, and then averaged, to take lengthening/contraction from curvature into account. 
2.3 Curvature-normal offset
The method achieved further refinement by taking into account rotational deformation of the models’ vertebrae. Rotational deformation information was encoded in the point sets by duplicating the manually placed points at a constant offset normal to the curvature of the model at each landmark. These offsets were also scaled by the ratio of model lengths. This curvature-normal method differs fundamentally from the anterior offset method by defining the geometry of the offset points entirely in terms of the model, rather than using the scene view coordinates, external to either model.
The direction normal to the curvature of the spine at a given landmark point was approximated as the vector cross product of the vector between the landmarks on the vertebra, and the average of the vectors from the landmark below, and the landmark above to the landmark in question.
