The method using only manually placed fiducials resulted in unacceptable dilation in the anterior-posterior direction (see figure X). This distortion was likely the result of the highly planar nature of both sets of points, each set constituting a warped sheet. Points placed on the transverse processes are naturally distributed primarily in the superior-inferior direction, and to some extent, along the right-left axis since each point has a symmetric partner. This point distribution, in principle, allowed for a reasonably accurate transformation in the superior-inferior directions, but differences between the length of the atlas and scan models caused unnatural scaling of the vertebrae. The lack of fiducial distribution in the anterior-posterior directions left the registration algorithm with insufficient information to produce accurate transformations in this direction. The resulting transformations essentially left the anterior sides of the vertebral bodies in place while smearing the vertebrae into the posterior direction to register the points. This resulting in oddly shaped results upon transformation of the atlas model (see figure X+1). 
These results prompted us to try placing an additional fiducial at an anterior offset from each manually placed fiducial. This also allowed the differences in scale between the atlas and CT models to be taken into account; the anterior offset was scaled on the scan model by the ratio of the length of the scan model to that of the atlas. This technique improved registration results but still left vertebrae with rotational deformation looking unnatural after the transformation. This was because the additional fiducial points enabled the registration algorithm to determine by how much to expand or contract vertebrae in the anterior-posterior direction but offered no information about how to rotate them into place (figure).
The problem of representing rotational deformation of the spine was solved by placing a second set of points as with the simple anterior-offset, but in the direction of maximum curvature of the spine. 
